spec: add capnproto to the format registry (#1788)
foxglove/mcap: website/docs/spec/registry.md

- `message_encoding`: [`flatbuffer`](https://google.github.io/flatbuffers/)

### capnproto

- `message_encoding`: [`capnproto`](https://capnproto.org/encoding.html)

> A single Cap'n Proto message using [stream framing](https://capnproto.org/encoding.html#serialization-over-a-stream): a segment table followed by segment contents, unpacked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single Cap'n Proto message using standard [stream seralization](https://capnproto.org/encoding.html#serialization-over-a-stream) (not packed).
```

Tweaked based on reading another sentence in the docs: https://capnproto.org/otherlang.html#:~:text=Specifically%2C%20the%20plugin%20receives%20a%20CodeGeneratorRequest%2C%20using%20standard%20serialization%20(not%20packed)

Author: The linked page specifically mentions the "standard stream framing", and even the "serialization over a stream" section repeatedly calls for a "framing format". So I think "framing" is a more idiomatic term here than "serialization". And they also much more frequently refer to it as "unpacked" rather than "not packed".

Granted I'm not super well versed in capnproto, but those are the words it feels to me they use.

Author: Updating with a minor addition to clarify the stream framing, but keeping that word as it appears most idiomatic.

> A single Cap'n Proto message using [stream framing](https://capnproto.org/encoding.html#serialization-over-a-stream): a segment table (count, sizes, and padding) followed by segment contents, unpacked.

Author: I asked several fronteir agents whether this wording was clear and they said it was. I feel like you are being pedantic. Let me know if you were genuinely confused by this, otherwise mark as resolved.

- `encoding`: `flatbuffer`
- `data`: A [reflection.Schema](https://github.com/google/flatbuffers/blob/master/reflection/reflection.fbs) flatbuffer describing the parsed schema encoded as a binary flatbuffer. This can be generated by running `flatc -b --schema` on the fbs file.

### capnproto

> - `name`: The `displayName` of the root type's node within the schema, e.g. `myschema.capnp:Foo.Bar`. The root type is located by finding the struct `Node` whose `displayName` matches this value.

Author: [Cursor/Opus on behalf of Adrian]:

Thanks — good push, and it's the same concern that came up in #860. I've updated the spec text (7a2592d) and expanded the reasoning under "Root type identification" in the PR description. Summary of where this lands:

- **Why not switch to the 64-bit `id`:** `name` and `data` always live in the same Schema record, produced by the same `capnp compile` invocation, so the lookup is self-contained — display-name formatting drift across toolchain versions can't desync them the way it could across separate artifacts. And the stable `id` isn't lost: every node's `id` is retained inside the `CodeGeneratorRequest`, so a reader that wants to verify it has the right schema (or detect evolution) can recompile its local `.capnp`, read the deterministic ids, and compare — independent of `displayName`. So `displayName` is just the human-readable lookup handle; `id` remains the authoritative identity, available in `data`.

- **Uniqueness / silent mis-resolution:** the entry now requires `name` to identify exactly one struct node, so ambiguity is a well-defined error rather than a silent wrong match. The only way to get a collision is a pathological layout (two files sharing a display name, e.g. via `--src-prefix`), and this makes that fail loudly. Enforcement is reader/validator-side so writers aren't burdened.

- **Is `displayName` guaranteed populated?** Yes — the compiler always sets `displayName` on every node in a `CodeGeneratorRequest` (it's how plugins derive filenames and type names), so the lookup key is always present.

I kept `displayName` (rather than adding the same-toolchain legalese) because the entry now spells out the derivation — it's literally the compile path plus the scoped type name — which makes reproducibility self-evident and keeps parity with the `protobuf`/`flatbuffer` entries.

On the separate `well_known.py` question: I'd leave it out of this docs-only PR. That list is already incomplete (missing `msgpack`, `omgidl`) and it's the only language lib that keeps one — the others just link the registry, so `registry.md` is effectively the source of truth. Happy to add `capnproto` there in a follow-up alongside the missing ones if that's useful.

> - `name`: The `displayName` of the root struct node (the path passed to `capnp compile` followed by the type's scoped name), e.g. `my_schema.capnp:Foo.Bar`. Must match exactly one struct node in `data`.

Reviewer: Sitting with this description a bit more, it seems to imply that `capnp compile` knows about the root struct node in some way – but in fact, I think there's probably no reason you _have_ to pick a struct from the path passed to `capnp compile` at all (e.g. you could pick one from a file that it imports directly or indirectly)

So maybe something more like this (I also brought back @jon-chuang's helpful note about `--src-prefix`):

```suggestion
- `name`: Fully qualified name identifying the message struct in the CodeGeneratorRequest (corresponding to its `displayName`). Must identify exactly one struct node. (While the exact format of the `displayName` is not guaranteed to be stable by Cap'n Proto, this is usually the path passed to `capnp compile` followed by the type's scoped name, e.g. `my_schema.capnp:Foo.Bar`. The prefix can also be influenced via the `--src-prefix` flag.)
```

Author: Thanks. After much research on idiomatic terms, I incorporated some of your language and added the `--src-prefix` comment.

Author: > in fact, I think there's probably no reason you have to pick a struct from the path passed to capnp compile at all (e.g. you could pick one from a file that it imports directly or indirectly)

@jtbandes adding some clarification: Correct that you can reference any struct that exists in the CodeGeneratorRequest. However, `capnp compile` (tested with v1.5.0) only includes structs from files directly passed to it, plus their transitive dependencies. It does not include struts in imported files unless they are also transitive dependencies.

Author: > The new wording drops the bit that says which struct this is

@claude I'm reverting to "root struct" out of an abundance of caution. However, I think given the context of an mcap file (which has channels full of messages), it should be very obvious which struct to name - the one that your messages on this channel are typed as.

- `encoding`: `capnproto`

> - `data`: A binary [CodeGeneratorRequest](https://github.com/capnproto/capnproto/blob/master/c%2B%2B/src/capnp/schema.capnp) describing the parsed schema and all of its imports, as produced by `capnp compile -o/bin/cat`.

Reviewer: Looks like `-o -` has been supported [for ages](https://github.com/capnproto/capnproto/pull/190) and is a more standard way of getting stuff to stdout.

```suggestion
- `data`: A binary [CodeGeneratorRequest](https://github.com/capnproto/capnproto/blob/master/c%2B%2B/src/capnp/schema.capnp) describing the parsed schema and all of its imports, as produced by `capnp compile -o - my_schema.capnp`.
```

Author: Thanks, updated
